# data_archive_POQ21_Sharing_data_collected_with_smartphone_sensors

Replication  materials for Strunminskaya et al (2021) Sharing data collected with smartphone sensors: Willingness, participation, and non-participation bias. Public Opinion Quarterly, in press.

Please download the .pdf for details on our analyses code. Analyses are using administratiuve data, which is only available through secure access at Statistics Netherlands.


Abstract:
Using smartphone sensors can offer researchers more detailed information about human behavior. Sensors native to smartphones allow measurement of phenomena that are difficult or impossible to capture via self-report such as geographical movement or physical activity. Sensors can reduce respondent burden by eliminating survey questions and improve measurement accuracy by replacing or augmenting self-reports. However, if respondents who are not willing or able to collect sensor data differ from those who are, the results can be biased. Research on the mechanisms of willingness to collect sensor data and actual participation is scarce and mostly comes from (non-probability) online panels. In a cross-sectional general population randomized experiment, we investigate how features of the request and respondent characteristics influence hypothetical willingness to share as well as actually sharing smartphone-sensor data. We manipulate framing of the request as (1) benefitting the participant, (2) emphasizing participants’ autonomy over data collection, and (3) assuring data confidentiality. We assess nonparticipation bias using the administrative records linked to the survey data. Willingness to share and sharing varies by sensor task, autonomy over data sharing, respondent’s smartphone skills, privacy concerns, and attitudes toward surveys. Fewer people agree to share photos and a video than geolocation, but all who agreed actually shared photos or a video. Some nonresponse and nonparticipation biases are substantial and make each other worse, but others move estimates in the opposite direction, making the overall bias appear smaller. Small or no framing effects signal the dependency of sensor-data sharing decisions on the situational context.
